---
layout: post
date:   2017-08-08
title:  "Food for Algorithms for Thought"
permalink: thinking
categories: knowledge
comments: true
---

(This essay by request; it will be useless to many)

I.

A common response to being asked a question you don't know the answer to is to feel "stuck": you've scanned your brain and come up empty, so there are no leads on what to try next. On the other hand, some people are pretty good at winging a response to strange and complex questions they have never heard before, coming up with a partial answer or at least relevant thoughts. Let's call this skill "intellectual improv". Is there any way for someone who usually feels "stuck" to learn to wing it, i.e., is there any way for someone to improve their intellectual improv?

Probably there is. Winging this question, the first answer I think of is "obviously practice".

The weakest form of this is that essentially every person has the capability to get slightly better at essentially anything they practice, because they're a learning algorithm and that's what learning algorithms do. A stronger version is that I've seen people get nontrivially better at intellectual improv via practice, and I think that most people can do so.

However, people often prefer lessons to autodidacting for a reason. So what tips can we give to one attempting to train in intellectual improv beyond "practice more"?

First, an example.

II.

Does protectionism hurt other states?

Sure seems like yes, but let's say your interlocutor doesn't believe you: this is actually up in the air. By association, you can throw out some thoughts: protectionism seems bad because some people are being given preferential treatment. Protectionism seems bad because things are less free. Protectionism seems bad because...

Let's go back a step. What is protectionism? Protectionism generally refers to tariffs or regulations meant to reduce imports so that domestic businesses can sell more of their product instead. If you have to restrict imports for consumers to buy domestic versions, this means the import was preferred, of higher quality or lower price. This means that the consumers are losing out. But clearly the domestic producers are gaining. But this is at the expense of the external producers, and if you associate these people with Third World countries or similar, you may remember that many times people who can produce a good cheaper can do so because of cheaper labor, which occurs because such people value money more, because happiness goes up with the log of money, so redistribution from richer to poorer people increases summed happiness of people. So this is one reason protectionism may be bad.

Or the words "free trade" may come to mind while thinking about this un-free trade situation, and you may remember that economists love free trade. If you remember Econ 101, hopefully you remember too the words or concept of "deadweight loss". If not, you might be able to reconstruct things a bit: if tariffs increase price (or regulations decrease quality), the quantity demanded will decrease... and if you are invested, you can draw a Price v Quantity graph with supply and demand curves, and it may become clear. If it doesn't leap at you, try formalizing it a bit: what you really want is to figure out "who gets what", and with this in mind you can determine the areas under the curves that correspond to consumer/producer surplus and the missing triangle which is deadweight loss. 

Or if you're stuck after the positives of free trade, you might think of where it could be possible for there to be negatives. It's pretty obvious the whole pie is bigger, and the consumers' and producers' pies are bigger, but the one other thing about pies that people talk about is inequality. So it seems likely that any argument for protectionism would have to go through this route: something about the distribution of gains from new markets opening would be said to benefit the rich. Modeling this is difficult, but you can have thoughts: perhaps the rich achieve preferential attachment of gains from new markets because they're in a good position to exploit them. On the other hand, startups do well in disrupted ecosystems, so why not expect that? And certainly we don't expect preferential attachment to make anyone *worse* off, unless you take a strictly relative view of wealth. And then you can get into the hedonics of wealth or the microeconomics of firm competition in emerging markets or wherever you want to go.

Or say your interlocutor takes a different tack than inequality. They might say they don't actually care about the other states, it's fine to protect one's own. But this should associate to other times people have said this, like in wars, or in selfishness, etc, to which the answer is always "if you do this to someone, they will do it back, and you will both be worse off." This may associate to "prisoner's dilemma", where you want to cooperate (allow free trade) instead of defecting (high tariffs), but with the modification that the other person always has the chance to change to high tariffs later (because this is really an iterated prisoner's dilemma). Or if they think everyone won't be worse off for some reason, you can check this against your historical knowledge: if you wouldn't be worse off, everyone should do this without consequence, but historically all the golden ages involve lots of trade and open borders and economic activity (Hellenistic, Gupta Empire, Renaissance, not [China from 1500-1900][China]). And the high-level concepts of comparative advantage or consumer/producer surplus being positive-sum may help shore these up. But if you really don't want to get into economics, you can just think about what happens if you try this (especially the limiting behavior): let's raise all tariffs on imports really high. Now you can't buy foreign things, and your domestic industries have more of a monopoly on you. You get things like American-made cars being of lower quality than Toyota, and generally less competition, which lets everyone be less efficient.

These thoughts may not convince the interlocutor of anything specific, but they accomplish our task of breaking into the mode of having thoughts.

III.

A lot of economics concepts came up in the above, so the first lesson here is probably to learn basic econ if you want to debate econ policies. This goes generally: for the further examples below, it's really helpful to have the basics of domain knowledge. (I also claim that just intro textbooks will get you essentially the entire toolkit needed to figure the world out, but that's another essay.)

Ignoring the domain-specific knowledge, we can pinpoint some other helpful mental moves. At the beginning of any question, the most efficient way to proceed is to look for any associations. But this mental process is automatic, and the feeling of being "stuck" usually comes right after the association search comes up empty. So the first *real* thing that helped was to ask what protectionism was.

Trying to define "protectionism" is one instance of a general class of techniques. It doesn't have to be defining a word, but could be defining several words, or highlighting specifics of the supposed dynamic being discussed. The important part is that you start drilling down into the parts of the concept, the gears that make it turn. This can be called "operationalizing" or "formalizing" or anything you want, but it does two important things.

First, it makes everything more specific so that you don't gloss over anything important. Many disagreements come from people using hazy concepts that mean different things to each of them, or concepts hazy enough that they can lead to almost anywhere—--this gets completely out of hand once you've chained a few of them together. Aspiring rationalists are immediately taught to "operationalize" parts of a disagreement (in CFAR's double crux), "replace the symbol with the substance" (Less Wrong Sequences), or "taboo your words" (the Sequences, and a common meme)—--and the same goes for exploratory thinking, just as it does for discussion or argument. Operationalizing "protectionism" into a regulatory action by the government that changes the price for consumers so as to increase the quantity sold by domestic producers and decrease imports really fleshes out the dynamic you are looking to describe, in a way that gets you pretty far toward just drawing the deadweight loss diagram and calling it done. 

Second, operationalizing will get you to other nearby concepts that you can associate with. Once you are talking about tariffs and domestic businesses, you can notice things like "free trade", "international businesses", "deregulation", "us vs. them", and a host of other associations. Most of thinking is just by association, so if you can increase the number of things to associate to, you are likely to have a lot more thoughts.

So let's call operationalizing the first important step. And we can broadly characterize the future thoughts it opens up: more and more formalizing until you see and understand the whole system, or more and more association until you hit the right thought that pertains well to the situation. 

IV.

I do this first step on essentially every question. After this, it's still an art—but art has toolkits as well. 

Common mental operations that prove helpful:
* extremize the situation, or look at limiting behavior
* formalize the situation, or construct a toy model, or actually draw out a diagram
* simulate the situation in your head, making sure all the actual steps seem reasonable
* look at real-life or historical examples of the situation at hand or an associated concept
* consider whether the situation or its opposite would conflict with anything you know about the world (if x were true, what would I expect the world to look like? What if x were false?)
* are there similar situations where things are subtly different? 
* pretty much any human conflict can be reduced to a prisoner's dilemma or principal-agent problem which drives the entirety of the behavior
* pretty much any other human behavior can be explained by incentives and signaling—find that incentive or signal

Doing any of these operations will usually result in at least one new thought that can be fodder for association (in the protectionism case study, you can see a lot of thoughts tend to branch off from the one before, not all from the original question).

Memorizing a bunch of steps you have to deploy is never feasible initially. For these to be useful, you have to be able to deploy them on the fly, which means your neural net needs to be comfortable with them and be able to fire the right ones in the right situations. Here we get back to practice: even for something as difficult as thinking better, the answer tends to lie in practice.

Let me draw an analogy specifically to math. This situation is very similar to proof-based math in terms of learning the right moves to make at a given time. Budding mathematicians gradually learn to spot cases where different proofs are useful. Suppose you want to show that a function always has some property: in some cases you just show that it has the property on a generic element of its domain, in others you show that not having the property would lead to a contradiction, in others you show that having the property on one element implies all the rest and then show it has the property on the first element, etc. And we are given useful names for these: direct proof, proof by contradiction, proof by induction. In intellectual improv, you have a very similar toolkit of moves. I try to list out a few of them above, but it seems almost as easy to learn types of proof by watching other people do proofs as it is to learn them by memorizing a list (and you still need examples). Later, once you intuitively understand the different moves and their applications, it becomes more fruitful to talk about them on their own.

I keep harping on practice and examples and applications, and I mean to continue. It's no secret among my friends that I'm an avid fan of Slate Star Codex, almost rivaling everyone's undying love for the Sequences. The Sequences teach you over and over how to avoid mistakes, how to solve philosophical problems with good epistemics, how to analyze evidence about hypotheses. Absolutely vital. But I got almost as much out of Slate Star Codex afterward as a training ground: endless posts about nutrition, medicine, the social sciences, economics, practical ethics, and cultural groups provided the kind of sea of hypotheses and fractured evidence and general confusion that one tends to encounter in the world. Other posts like "Getting Eulered" introduce a cognitive tool, which he then references in future essays. Someone with a little more NMDA-receptor hypofunction might even mistake this for intentional spaced repetition. In general, Scott analyzes a bunch of different viewpoints, takes you through logical steps, breaks things apart into structured claims, writes a ton of words, and (arguably) essentially always comes to an asymptotically correct solution—the perfect training data. 

Slate Star Codex is probably not the best training for all people. Some may not love the social sciences theme compared to LessWrong or other blogs. Others may not like the time commitment. But doing it by reading blog-length arguments seems ideal. These provide vastly more training data than reading an entire book on a single viewpoint. They don't feature the social pressure of arguments with other people. And they give you time to process and predict, because you're reading instead of engaging in live dialogue.

I actually have a plan to make a better training ground for thoughts in the near future, because the EV seems extremely high. For now, though, I can only urge deliberate practice in whatever way is most amenable to you.

[China]: https://www.cato.org/publications/speeches/trade-transformation-china
