---
layout: post
date:   2017-07-25
title:  "Multi-Disciplinary Research in the Internet Age"
permalink: multi-disciplinary
categories: knowledge
comments: true
---

I don't know exactly what research was like 40 years ago. But it seems like Google Scholar gives us the ability to do more multi-disciplinary research than before, because one can find the best resources very quickly. You don't need as much metis in a new research area to figure out the core papers and concepts; you can spend minutes bouncing from paper to paper rather than hours in a library; you can easily contact the relevant people in a small subfield, even if they're geographically separated. You used to get much of your domain-knowledge from an advisor, and have limited ability to obtain non-domain knowledge, so the falling cost of information on the internet preferentially benefits non-domain knowledge.

As a society, I think we haven't yet fully exploited this. There are still stories of some geologist talking to a mathematical biologist over drinks and hearing that the problem they've been working on for years is just an analog of this differential equation the biologist's friend is using. This should ideally almost never happen: there really aren't that many mathematical frameworks, and if it took a few weeks/year of researchers' time to read up on different general mathematical techniques in use in different fields, I think the reduced rabbit-holes and lag-time would be entirely worth the effort.

Academia is a weakly efficient market of its own. The results with highest expected impact/expected effort ratio are preferentially discovered. If actual effort to find multi-disciplinary results has gone down, but expected effort hasn't, then this is a market inefficiency that can be rectified to increase productivity. This may be especially important given the high impact of linking fields together: consider the Grothendieck program, Erlangen program, and Langlands program; consider initial advances pure mathematics allowed in physics during the '80s; consider the additions of Bayesian and AI theory to neuroscience; consider all the additions of applied mathematics to geology, biology, and economics; consider how the only solutions to any problems in philosophy have come from other disciplines. Most modern fields as we know them were formed by grafting with the work of other fields. And most of the time after the grafting, it feels like the field is revitalized by myriad new research avenues the unification has opened up. 

(There are of course many counterexamples where outsiders come into a field and are so annoying, but the EV still seems clearly positive.)

The discrepancy between descriptive and normative here seems due to several factors. Academic inertia seems partly at fault for the information failure in actors noticing this development. Risk aversion in the potential actors seems relevant, as most researchers famously failed to give reasonable answers to Hamming's query on why they weren't working on the most important problems. Genuine under-incentivizing for multi-disciplinary research also seems a culprit, as it is harder to get initial papers published and takes longer for researchers to see the value in your result.

This problem will fix itself eventually, but science pays for its ability to always get to the right answer by taking up to decades to get there. It seems possible to speed this up by targeting the specific failures mentioned above. First, the information problem can be partially ameliorated by increasing awareness (never thought I'd advocate those two words in that order). Second, the risk aversion and incentive problem can be targeted by funding changes. I'm unfortunately uncertain about what exact changes to make there—constant funding untethered to research output can help provide opportunities to do multi-disciplinary research for those who are risk-averse, but research prizes and similar risky funding is the easiest incentive. Perhaps funding between disciplines should just be increased in general. Someone who has worked with scientific funding more closely may be able to comment on a better proposal. Of course, the best incentive would be social prestige, but I see no easy way to create extra prestige for such researchers.

Beyond the question of how, there is also the question of whether it is even desirable to speed up multi-disciplinary research. Aside from existential risk research, our main tool in combating such risks is promoting differential technological development, so it is very much worth asking whether this would mitigate or exacerbate our x-risk likelihood. I am relatively split on whether this would favor faster development of safe or unsafe technologies, so I will very tentatively advocate it. Dissent is obviously welcomed.