---
layout: post
date:   2017-05-16
title:  "Brains"
permalink: brains
categories: neuro
comments: true
---

Why does being sick make it so hard to think?
Why does alcohol make you think different thoughts?
Why does acid make you think way different thoughts?
depression and inflammation? 
Your brain has multiple different thought-patterns to choose from, depending on something like neurotransmitter level, and your thoughts genuinely get changed when you're angry or in love: that's why it's a real costly signal and credible precommitment

Everything I know about psychedelics, spirituality, and the mind

http://scienceblogs.com/aardvarchaeology/2010/03/31/a-strong-smell-of-turpentine-p/
Why is it a strong smell of turpentine? Because all the larger questions have been answered, and so your mind goes back to basic sense data. It also tends to feel them very metaphorically, with many associations, as if each sensory aspect explains much about the universe

http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/08/11/book-review-pihkal/
The part at the end about the recurring experience: I have a similar one, always in gray, with extremely large/small orbs floating and a really unsettling sense while everything's proportions skew infinitely like I am being stretched. It also happened frequently in childhood and only occasionally since. Mine never became good at the end.

Spirituality is the sense that everything is ok. Many things can give you this: check evernote. 

God always seemed silly, and frequently my problem is that even when nice meaning starts happening, I remember everything is made of atoms. But Ann's description reminds me: Is there a Mind who perceives our whole world? I always felt no, but if all computable structures exist (like in unsong), there is actually a mind somewhere that is sifting through a simulation of our universe (or even just the mathematical structure itself) and pulling out all the regularities and experiencing that which we experienced. This doesn't have to change our lives all that much, but I feel a profound sense of overskepticism for not noticing this before.

Weed and alcohol; dreams; etc




othing to see here, [nothing at all][conspiracy]. Can you even see `this`?

[conspiracy]: http://www.thebayesianconspiracy.com/
